R  -v-  RUEBEN BRATHWAITE Swansea Crown Court Sentencing Remarks of Mr Justice Picken - 14 September 2018 1. Rueben  Brathwaite,  you  have  pleaded  guilty  to  murdering  your  stepmother,  Fiona Scourfield, in March this year. At that time you were 16 years’ and 11 months’ old, your date of birth being 5 April 2001. You are now 17 years’ and 4 months’ old. 2. As  your  counsel,  Mr  Paul  Hobson,  has  rightly  observed,  and  as  you  yourself  have described it in a letter which you have written to me, the circumstances of this case are horrific. The level of your culpability is very high indeed.  3. Briefly,  Fiona  Scourfield  was  54  at  the  date  of  her  death.  She,  your  father,  Charles Brathwaite, and you lived together at Broadmoor Farm, St. Clears in a log cabin in the 14 acres of land attached to the farmhouse which was owned by Fiona Scourfield’s mother, Charlotte  (sometimes  known  as  Lorraine).  Fiona  Scourfield  was  a  ceramicist  and  a passionate  animal  lover.  She  looked  after  some  32  animals  on  your  smallholding  and worked, often with your assistance, in support of animal charities. Fiona Scourfield was plainly a good and decent person.  4. Your  father  is  a  landscape  gardener  and  tree  surgeon.  I  should  say  immediately  that  I have received a letter from him which I have read with care. I am acutely aware of the appalling position in  which he  finds himself: as somebody who has lost the woman  he loved  as  a  result  of  the  actions  of  the  son  whom  he  continues  to  love  and,  indeed, support.  He  is  entitled  both  to  sympathy  and  to admiration  in  equal  measure.  You  are very fortunate to have his continued support as your father.  Also  deserving  of  sympathy  is,  of  course,  Charlotte  Scourfield,  Fiona  Scourfield’s mother, whose moving statement I have had read to me today. You  began  living  with  your  father  and  stepmother  in  the  log  cabin  from  June  2013 onwards, after a deterioration in your relationship with your mother. Fiona Scourfield and you got on reasonably well, although it is right to acknowledge that you told the police in interview after your arrest that you felt upset at your life because “if 1 5. 6. 7.  I was to make a mistake or do something out of place, she would make me feel as if I was in the wrong”. It appears that it was this feeling of upset that led you, wholly unjustifiably of course, to do what you did. This, and the fact that you had developed an interest in murder in the lead-up to the incident, accessing images of killings via the internet.  8. On 6 March 2018, you returned home from school in the late afternoon on the school bus. Sometime later, the police received a ‘999 call’ from you. In that call you explained what you had done. You said that you had hit Fiona Scourfield over the head with an axe in chillingly straightforward terms. You said this: “Yeah, with like, you know the blunt side of an axe, like you turn it around and it’s the heavy side, err, I hit her with that and then my Dad has a samurai sword in his bedroom and I sort of sliced her throat and stabbed her with that too, erm, she is definitely dead, I cut her throat and there was so much blood, I think I cut an artery as well”. 9. You went on to explain that you had hit Fiona Scourfield with the axe “maybe 8 or 9 times” and  that  you  could  see  her  brain,  before  explaining  that  the  reason  why  you  had  done what  you  did  was  that  you  were  fed  up  with  your  life  and  that  you  wanted to  commit suicide but that you could not bring yourself to do that and “so I thought if I could possibly kill  someone  else,  it  would  you  know,  get  me  out  of  …”.  Then,  no  less  straightforwardly,  you went on to describe how Fiona Scourfield took good care of you and loved you, before saying this: “I had the intention of killing her, but what I wanted to do was knock her out with the axe and then cut her  throat  so  she  didn’t  die  in  too  much  pain  you  know. My  intention  wasn’t  to murder  her  in  some psychotic way, I just wanted to, I just wanted her dead so that I could have a life, but, I’m just fed up of, ok, I’m putting the sword, it’s got blood on it, I’m putting the sword in the caravan now, I’m not trying to hide it from you, I’m being open, I’m just going to hide it, to put it away.” 10. The  police  and  paramedics  then  arrived.  You  were  immediately  detained  and  arrested. You  were  compliant  with  the  officers  and  were  taken  to  Haverfordwest  police  station.  There  in  the  custody  suite,  you  asked  one  of  the  officers  whether  he  had ever  taken  a murderer into custody before. 11. The police located Fiona Scourfield.  Her body was slumped in the front doorway of the property. It was obvious that she was dead. Severe injuries to her head and throat were immediately  apparent.  Approximately  a  metre  away  from  the  body,  a  small  axe  was  2 recovered. A sword sheath and a crowbar were recovered nearby. The sword itself was recovered in the doorway. 12. In interview the next day, you were no less matter-of-fact, explaining that you got home from  school  at  about  4  pm  after  “a  regular  day”.  Fiona  Scourfield and  her  mother  were sitting  there  with  two  dogs  next  to  them.  About 20  minutes  later,  Charlotte  Scourfield left. Then, having  been  chatting to your stepmother, you  went outside, grabbed  an axe from  your  father’s  workshop  and  brought  it  just  outside  the  entrance  to  the  cabin  or chalet. You told the police that you then went back inside and looked underneath your father’s  bed  where  you  knew  that  there  was  a  sword.  You  grabbed  that,  unsheathed  it and took it outside. Then, with the axe in your hand, you went around to the window of the living room and indicated to your stepmother that there was something wrong with the cat in order to get her to join you outside. As  she stepped outside of the door, you struck her on the front of her skull with the blunt end of the axe. She fell unconscious to the ground and then you repeatedly struck her. Then, as you saw blood coming out of her skull, you used the samurai sword to slice at the neck. It was at this stage that you called the police. 13. You explained also, disturbingly, that you had taken two photographs of her – one after the  attack  with  the  axe  and  the  next  after  you  had  used  the  sword.  You  had  tried  to upload these photographs to the ‘4chan’ website but had been unsuccessful in that. You stated that you wanted to do this as a kind of confession. You stated that you had been viewing imagery of extreme violence on the internet for about a year. You added that you thought of doing what you did the night before. You had thought of killing yourself but you decided to kill your stepmother instead as a way of getting arrested and, as you put it, out of your life. 14. There is only one sentence that the law allows to be passed for the offence of  murder. That is a mandatory sentence of imprisonment or detention for life where the offender is aged over 18. In the case of an offender who is aged under 18 at the time of the offence, the  appropriate  sentence  is  detention  at  Her  Majesty’s  pleasure:  see  the  Powers  of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000, s. 90. 15. I am required to specify the minimum term, pursuant to Section 269 and Schedule 21 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003, which must elapse before you can be released on licence.  3 The  applicable  starting  point  for  the  minimum  term  in  the  case  of  an  offender  aged under 18 is a period of 12 years: see Schedule 21, paragraph 7. 16. Pursuant to paragraph 5A of Schedule 21, Parliament has set a 25-year starting point for the  minimum  term  for  anyone  aged  over  18  who  takes  a  weapon  to  the  scene  of  a murder intending to commit any offence or have it available as a weapon and who uses that knife or weapon in committing the murder.  There is no issue that this is a case in which a knife was taken by you to the scene and so that, had you been aged over 18, the appropriate starting point would have been 25 years.  17. I make it clear that I do not adopt that starting point in your case precisely because of your age. The starting point remains 12 years, not more. It is nonetheless appropriate, as Mr Hobson accepts, to have regard to the fact that you brought the axe and the sword to the scene as an aggravating feature of your offence. That this is appropriate is made clear in Att.-Gen.’s Reference (No. 126 of 2006) (R v H) [2007] 2 Cr.App.R.(S.) 59 cited in Archbold at paragraph 5-384 which describes the authority (accurately) as having decided “that whilst the starting point specified for an offender under the age of 18 at the time of the offence is 12 years (see para. 7), it is clear that the appropriate minimum term remains fact specific and may be well above or well below the starting point; that nothing precludes the court from reflecting on all the express features identified in the starting points for adult offenders in paragraphs 4 (whole life starting point), 5 (30-year starting point) and (now) 5A (25-year starting point) and, when they are found to be present, treating them as features which aggravate an offence to which the 12-year starting point applies; and that whilst the schedule underlines the long established sentencing principle that the level of ultimate criminality of an offender, who is young, is likely to be (but may not necessarily be) lower than the criminality of an older  offender,  there  is  no  mathematical  table  for  this  purpose  and  no  list  can  provide  an  accurate reflection of the way in which a young offender may or may not have learned from, or been damaged by, the experiences to which he has been exposed”. 18. The same point was recently made by Sir Brian Leveson P in R v Markham & Edwards [2017] EWCA Crim 739 when he stated as follows at [46]: “Having determined the correct starting point (12 years), the aggravating factors included those which, for an adult, would have justified a starting point of a higher order. Thus, for an offender over 21 years-old, cases in which the starting point would ‘normally’ be a whole life order include a double murder where each  involved  a  substantial  degree  of  premeditation  or  planning;  for  an  offender  over  18  years-old,  a double  murder  would,  in  any  event,  ‘normally’  justify  a  starting  point  of  30  years,  and  any  murder  4 involving a knife or weapon brought to the scene, a starting point of 25 years is identified. Given that, for those under 18, the appropriate starting point is always 12 years, features which would have changed the starting  point  for  an  adult  become  relevant  as  aggravating  the  offence  and  can  affect  the  appropriate minimum term.” 19. The  fact  that,  as  Mr  Hobson  points  out,  the  weapons  were  owned  by  your  father  and were  kept  at  the  property  where  you  lived,  so  that  they  were  readily  available,  is something to be borne in mind but the fact remains that you made the clear decision to go  and  find  each  of  them  with  the  intention  of  using  them  to  kill  your  stepmother. Indeed, I note from the Carmarthenshire Youth Support Service report prepared for the purposes of this hearing and based, in part, on discussions between you and Mrs Davina Davies  that,  when  you  first  went  outside  after  finishing  your  tea,  you  initially  found  a crow bar but thought that this was too light, and so you alighted upon the axe. You told the police something similar during interview. You also were aware that your father kept a samurai sword beneath his bed and you recognised that this could be used to cut Fiona Scourfield’s throat. 20. This  is  consistent  also  with  the  murder  having  been  pre-planned  which  it  plainly  was. Indeed, Mr Hobson acknowledges that this was the case since he accepts that there was, as he puts it, a degree of premeditation, your having indicated to the police that you had thought about killing your stepmother the night before.  21.  Mr Hobson submits, however, that there was no planning at that stage, observing that, based on what you told the police in interview, the plan was formed at around the time that you returned home from school and so less than two hours before the killing. I am doubtful  about  this,  having  considered  the  contents  of  Mrs  Davies’s  report.  You  told Mrs Davies that, having considered suicide, your thoughts then turned to your father and stepmother. You thought, however, that your father was too powerful and that he would potentially ‘fight back’. Fiona Scourfield, on the other hand, it seems you reasoned, was less likely to be able to do that due to her smaller stature. This is clearly, therefore, a case where  the  aggravating  factor  identified  in  paragraph  10(a)  of  Schedule  21,  namely  “a significant  degree  of  planning  or  premeditation”,  is  applicable.  Mr  Hobson  submitted  that nonetheless  the  degree  of  planning  or  premeditation  was  not  as  great  as  it  could  have been. That may be right but, on any view, this was not a spur of the moment attack since you decided to do what you did either the night before or in the period after you had left  5 school, and this should not be overlooked in arriving at the appropriate minimum term: in short, there needs to be an uplift to reflect the premeditation involved in this case. 22.  Otherwise,  although  not  statutory  aggravating  features,  I  consider  that  there  are  two further matters which are aggravating in this case. First, the savagery of the attack against a  defenceless  woman,  your  stepmother  and  somebody  who  cared  for  you,  makes  the offence all the worse. Secondly, there is the further highly disturbing fact that, no doubt inspired by the graphic images which you had seen on the internet in the months leading up to the attack, you attempted to upload photographs of Fiona Scourfield at two stages during the attack. In this regard, it should be noted that you told Mrs Davies when she met  you  for  the  purposes  of  her  preparing  her  report  that  your  viewing  included shocking  images  of  suicides  and  beheadings  and  that  your  obsession  progressed  to watching material which included mass murders and massacres. 23. I  turn,  next,  to  the  mitigating  factors  listed  in  paragraph  11  of  Schedule  21.  Obviously (g), namely the “age of the offender” is applicable. Your youth, both now and at the time that you  killed  your  stepmother,  is  an  important  aspect  which  I  have  very  much  in  mind, whilst at the same time acknowledging that the 12-year starting point is itself a very much reduced starting point compared with what would have been 25 years had you been aged over 18. 24.  Mr  Hobson  did  not  suggest  that  any  of  the  other  factors  listed  in  paragraph  11  is applicable in your case. In particular, he did not suggest that (c) applies, namely “the fact that the offender suffered from any mental disorder or mental disability which (although not falling within section 2(1) of the Homicide Act 1957 (c 11)), lowered his degree of culpability”. This is, no doubt, in  recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  psychiatrist  who  has  examined  you  as  instructed  by your solicitors, Dr Sanikop, has concluded that you were not suffering from any mental health condition at the time of the offence.  25. I should say, in this regard, that I have read not only what Mrs Davies has to say in her report concerning your feelings of isolation and unhappiness but also what you have had to say in a letter to me, particularly concerning your feelings of depression in the months leading up to March this year. I note that you and your father, who has also written to me, suggest that you are suffering from such a condition and that the sentence which you receive should reflect this. Unlike Dr Sanikop, however, neither of you is an expert in the field of mental health. In those circumstances, I must obviously approach the matter of  6 sentence  on  the  basis  that,  as  Dr  Sanikop  explains,  you  suffer  from  no  mental  health condition. Indeed, Mr Hobson explains that Dr Sanikop has been asked to look at what you have stated in your letter, and has confirmed that his opinion is unchanged.     26.  Otherwise, although non-statutory features, it seems to me that the fact that you have no previous convictions and the fact that you made full admissions both in the ‘999’ call and later in interview are mitigating factors which should also be borne in mind. So, too, is the fact that in your letter to me you appear, now at least, to have some insight as to the enormity of what you did and to be showing signs of remorse. 27. I  come,  then,  to  the  minimum  term  which  I  consider  is  appropriate  in  your  case. Weighing the aggravating features and the mitigating features against each other leads me to  increase  from  the  starting  point  of  12  years  to  18  years.  This,  however,  takes  no account  of  your  guilty  plea  which  it  is  common  ground  was  entered  at  the  first reasonable  opportunity,  namely  after  a  psychiatric  report  had  been  obtained  which addressed  issues  of  fitness  to  plead  and  any  medical  defences  which  may  have  been available. In the circumstances, there is no issue  that you  should receive full, one-sixth credit (the maximum available in cases of murder) for your guilty plea. This reduces the 18 years to 15 years. [Stand up, Rueben Brathwaite] 28. I sentence you in respect of the murder of Fiona Scourfield to detention at Her Majesty’s pleasure with a minimum term of 15 years. From this must be deducted the 189 days that you have spent on remand in custody for this offence. The victim surcharge must also be paid.  29. It is important to emphasise, so that you and the public can understand the position, that the minimum term is just that - a minimum period which must be served before you are considered for release. After it is served, there is no guarantee that you will be released at that time, or at any particular time thereafter. It is then only if the Parole Board decides you  are  fit  to  be  released  that  you  will  be  released.  Moreover  if,  and  when,  you  are released you will remain subject to licence for the rest of your life.    7 