    R -v-Ming Jiang  Manchester (Minshull Street) Crown Court  2nd May 2017  Sentencing Remarks   The Defendant has refused to come into Court to hear this sentence being imposed.   With the consent of his advocate I will proceed to impose sentence upon him in his absence and will refer to him in these sentencing remarks in the second person. I am  content for him to be given a copy of these remarks to read.   Last Friday you Ming Jiang were convicted at this Court of the single count you face on this indictment of murder. The trial was fully contested over a four week period. I presided over the trial. The jury took a little over four hours to reach their verdict.  The Facts   You were convicted of the murder of Yang Liu, somebody you knew via your joint interest  in  gambling  at  casinos  and  with  whom  you  shared  a  membership  of  the Chinese community in Manchester.  Yang Liu was born in China on the 6th May 1980. He was the only son of Li Ping Liu and  Ning  Sheng  Ouyang.  His  parents  have  provided  a  heartfelt  and  moving  victim  impact statement to which I shall refer later.  Yang Liu, just thirty-six years old when he died was a young man whom his parents describe  as  warm  and  full  of  life.  He  was  kind  and  well  loved.  He  was  respectful towards his family, in particular his grandparents before they died.  He was intelligent and studied hard at school and university in China. He gained good qualifications and told his family of his wish to further his education by studying in the United Kingdom. His parents and grandparents encouraged him in this ambition.   The family saved up money to help him go abroad and they maintained their financial support for him once he arrived. They kept in close contact with him even though he  was to live the last sixteen years of his life many thousands of miles away from them.   Yang  Liu  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  2000.  He  came  to  study  at  Leeds University. He met his wife Nan Wang. They graduated together before marrying and moving  to  Manchester  where  they  bought  a  flat.  Unfortunately  they  were  to  grow apart and divorced after eleven years together. They had no children. 1   Yang Liu lived alone in a flat he owned in Media City in Salford. He retained a circle of  friends  in  the  Chinese  community.  He  was  successful  in  finance,  investing  in stocks and shares and acquiring wealth. His family also sent him money.   He  lived  comfortably.  He  liked  to  dress  smartly.    He  enjoyed  a  social  life characterised  by  eating  out  and  visiting  casinos.  He  remained  a  popular,  kind  and gentle person to spend time with.  You, Ming Jiang befriended him at this part of his life, you moving in the same social  circles as he.  The  evidence  in  this  trial  bears  testimony  to  your  obsessive  desire  to  gamble  large sums of money in casinos.   There  was  evidence  that  you  were  viewed  by  some  clubs  you  visited  as  worthy  of special status such was the extent of your custom given to them. You were given this status  despite  being  barred  by  some  other casinos  who  had  grown  tired  of  what  has been  described  as  your  erratic  behaviour  –  generous  and  kind  when  you  won,  rude  and abusive to staff and others when you did not.   At  one  casino  where  you  remained  a  member,  you  were  assigned  to  a  special employee  whose  role  was  to  encourage  you  and  other  high  spending  customers  to remain  loyal  to  the  casino.  You  were  provided  with  gifts  and  other  gratuities  like  nights away at expensive hotels in London.   Like  many  of  those  attracted  to  this  type  of  life  your  high  spending,  high  rolling behaviour was in fact a selfish and self centred veneer behind which you hid a life of increasing dependency on debt which was rapidly spinning out of control.   The estimated losses you accumulated ran into hundreds of thousands of pounds over a comparatively short period of time and were to increase once you put into effect the plan you came up with to address the debt problems increasingly confronting you.  The plan was chilling but straight forward. You would commit a murder for personal gain.  You would exploit your supposed friendship with Yang Liu to lure him to your flat and  kill  him.  You  would  dispose  of  his  body  by  making  it  look  as  though  he  had disappeared.  You  would  then  use  your  considerable  experience  of  identity  theft  to  adopt  his identity, thus have access to his wealth and giving you the funds required to maintain  your gambling “VIP” persona. Should you be challenged you thought you would be  able to lie your way out of trouble.  On the 5th October 2016 you put your plan into effect. Telephone evidence suggests  you contacted Yang Liu and invited him to your flat in the east of Manchester. The  last pictures of him being alive are taken by CCTV cameras at the Metrolink station  2 near to your flat where you are seen to meet him and then walk with him towards your flat.   At your flat you killed him. You then treated his body in the most disrespectful and  appalling way. As a consequence of these actions by you, there is no evidence to say precisely where in your flat you killed him or how you did this.   However, given your plan it seems to me likely that you killed him quickly and that by the early hours of the 6th October he was dead.  In order to adopt his identity you were required to buy time before his disappearance could  be  noticed.  To  give  yourself  the  greatest  chance  to  do  this  you  decided  to dispose of his body so that no trace of him could be found.   To do this you decided to dismember him by removing from his body his head, hands and feet. You did this over a period of time, again in your flat either in the living room using a set of ladders to lay him flat or in your bathroom, in the bath.   You  used  sharp  metal  objects,  probably  knives,  to  conduct  this  grotesque  activity. These metal objects have never been found you having disposed of them.  Having  dismembered  his  body  you  disposed  of  those  parts  you  had  removed  by possibly  discarding  them  in  a  communal  rubbish  bin  serving  the  block  of  flats  in which you lived. The contents of this bin were incinerated before your involvement in this crime was discovered.    The  body  parts  you  removed  have  never  been  found.  Your  willingness  to  treat  the remains of another person in this manner portrays you as ruthless and cruel.  Discovery of what had happened started to occur after you disposed of the remaining torso  from  your  victim’s  body.  You  did  this  by  placing  the  torso  in  a  suitcase  and taking it to a lay-by some distance from Manchester on the main road to Sheffield.   You did this on the night of the 9th October.  Before going to this site you purchased a can  of  petrol.  You  poured  the  contents  of  the  can  onto  the  suitcase  before  setting  it  alight  in  the  lay-by  in  the  hope  that  the  suitcase  and  its  contents  would  be  so  badly destroyed by fire as to prevent identification.  The remains of the suitcase and what was left of Yang Liu’s body were discovered by walkers the following morning who then contacted the police.   The  police  commenced  a  painstaking  enquiry  which  via  number  plate  recognition technology traced your motor vehicle as having likely visited the lay-by at the time a  fire had been seen in there the previous night by passing motorists.   In due course the police came to you. They seized your car. DNA from Mr Liu was found on the boot. You were arrested.   3 Before  your  arrest  you  had  made  considerable  progress  with  your  plan  to  cover  up your victim’s killing and dismemberment, before adopting his identity and obtaining his wealth.  You made concerted attempts to clean up and leave your flat, changing the position of furniture  so  as  to  hide  the  blood  stains  you  couldn’t  remove,  painting  parts  of  the  walls and ceiling, washing furniture coverings and giving your landlord notice to end your tenancy.  You  had  transferred  significant  sums  of  money  from  Mr  Liu’s  accounts  to  those controlled by you. You had spent liberally on his credit and debit cards, even buying the petrol you were to use to burn his torso in the lay-by with one such card.   You made arrangements to sell Mr Liu’s flat in Media City, with a view to obtaining the proceeds of sale quickly. You were told the flat was worth at least £185,000 and expected to receive this money within a matter of days or weeks.  You took control of Mr Liu’s mobile phone, and more than once pretended to be him when speaking to lending institutions or estate agents either remotely or in person. On  one occasion you callously sent a text to Mr Liu’s mother in China pretending to be her son and re-assuring her as to her son’s well-being.  You  had  continued  to  gamble,  spending  hours  almost  every  day  at  casinos  in  both Manchester and Nottingham. You wagered thousands of pounds in the days after the  5th October before your arrest on the 20th October. There was a significant increase in  the amount you were prepared to risk during this period as compared with the period prior to your killing Mr Liu.  When the police spoke with you both before and after your arrest you put into action your plan to lie your way out of trouble.   You told the police that you and your victim were in a homosexual relationship and planned  soon  to  enter  a  civil  partnership.  You  explained  this  was  why  the  police enquiries had revealed you being so heavily involved in controlling Mr Liu’s financial affairs. All this was untrue.  You  told  the  police  you  knew  nothing  of  Mr  Liu’s  disappearance  but  believed  the  person  responsible  may  have  been  someone  called  John  Wong  who  had  become friendly  with  Mr  Liu  over  a  number  of  years  and  bore  him  ill-will  following  a gambling dispute.   You said Mr Wong and another unnamed man had been present with Mr Liu in your flat before the latter’s disappearance.  On the evidence presented at trial I am sure that the existence of “John Wong” and the other man is doubtful and is likely to be a smokescreen deliberately created by you to hide your culpability.    4  You repeated these lies in evidence at trial and as with the police enquiry before, the jury saw through them and delivered a verdict which was entirely consistent with the evidence presented to them.    This was a planned murder committed by you I am sure for personal gain.  Your actions ended the life of a gentle and kind young man.    They  demonstrate  that  you  are,  a  highly  dangerous,  cunning  and  ruthless  killer prepared  to  stop  at  nothing  to  fulfil  your  own  selfish  desire  to  feed  your  gambling habit.   Victim Impact Statements  Yang  Liu’s  parents  have  provided  a  joint  victim  impact  statement  which  has  been read  out  in  part  to  the  Court.  The  contents  of  the  statement  are  highly  personal  and make clear the terrible loss they have suffered.   I do not propose to repeat the contents of the statement here given it was recently read out in part during this hearing and has already been widely reported. However, I fully understand the daily torment and anguish Mr Liu and his wife have to endure.  For any parent to lose their child is extremely painful. In this case these parents have had to face the loss of their only child.    I accept and understand that the loss to Yang Liu’s parents will leave them bereft of significant  emotional  support  in  their  lives  from  their  only  son  –  support  they  were entitled to expect as they grow older, and which is so important in Chinese culture.  I recognise that there is little that I can say to help these parents with their grief at the  loss  of  their  son.  I  wish  to  express  however  the  Court’s  condolences  to  them, confident as I am that even though they are not present to hear what I am saying the contents of these remarks will be translated and made available to them.   The Sentence  There is only one sentence that can be imposed on conviction for murder and that is a sentence of life imprisonment. That will be the sentence in this case when I announce it shortly.  A sentence of life imprisonment imposed on a dangerous offender means what it says, life imprisonment.   You, Ming Jiang may spend the entirety of the rest of your life in prison and you will  certainly not be released from this sentence unless the Parole Board comes to the view that you are no longer to be considered a danger to the public.   Given  the  nature  of  this  murder  I  anticipate  the  authorities  at  the  appropriate  time, should it ever be reached, will have to consider with very great care the issue of the danger you present to the public if you are once more in the community.   5   It  is  entirely  possible,  in  the  circumstances  that  you  will,  in  fact  never  be  released from custody.  I am required to fix the minimum term that you will serve. This means the minimum period that you will serve in custody before you are even considered for release by the Parole Board.  You  should  note  this  minimum  term  cannot  be  reduced  or  changed  and  as  I  have  already said there is no guarantee that at the end of it you will be released. This will be a matter for assessment by the Parole Board at the time.  Pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Schedule  21  of  the  Criminal  Justice  Act  2003  a murder done for gain or for money is viewed as of particularly high seriousness and has as a staring point a minimum term of 30 years.  For reasons I have already alluded to I agree with the prosecution submission that this is the appropriate starting point in this case.   This murder was planned from the outset and the clear motive for the killing by you of Mr Liu was so that you could adopt his identity and gain access to his considerable  financial assets.  The starting point is thus thirty years.  Aggravating Features   Having adopted this starting point, I now turn to those and other aggravating features of this murder that Schedule 21 asks me to consider when adding to the starting point.   I am of the view that the following features aggravate this murder for gain;   There was dismemberment of Mr Liu’s body.  There was destruction and concealment of the body thereafter, the torso was set alight  and the head, hands and feet have never been recovered.  There was an attempt to mislead others at to the fate of Mr Liu and in particular the text to his mother in China.  You, Ming Jiang have shown a complete lack of remorse throughout and have been prepared  to  maintain  a  fabricated  account  both  to  the  police  in  interview  and  in  the presentation  of  your  case  at  trial  which  in part  I  view  as  having  been  demeaning  to your victim.   In particular you continued to describe him as in employment as a male escort without producing a shred of evidence to this effect.    6 Your  attitude  towards  your  victim  can  be  seen  from  the  evidence  of  one  witness (Kristian Gallagher) who indicated you referred to Mr Liu in far from complementary terms shortly after, in my judgement, you must have killed him.    Mitigating Features   I am prepared to afford you some mitigation for your lack of previous convictions and in particular that you have no convictions of violence recoded against you. However I do note your previous admitted involvement in identity fraud, all be it that there are no convictions for dishonesty recorded against you.  I have also listened carefully to everything said appropriately on your behalf.  Conclusion   I sentence you Ming Jiang to life imprisonment for the murder of Yang Liu.   The minimum term I impose is one of thirty-three years. This means you will not even be considered for release by the Parole Board until the year 2050.  The  days  you  have  spent  in  custody,  one  hundred  and  ninety  of  them,  will  count towards this sentence.  A victim surcharge is payable.   I have already set a POCA timetable earlier in this hearing.  I will make the Forfeiture and Destruction Orders the Crown seek as outlined in their written  sentencing  submissions  and  other  documentation  at  the  conclusion  of  the POCA proceedings.    On the assumption the POCA proceedings are settled I will make the Forfeiture and Destruction Orders administratively at the appropriate time without the need for this case to be re-listed.  I make no order as to your immigration status. These are matters to be dealt with by the appropriate authorities in due course and given the sentence I have imposed upon you form no part of this sentencing exercise.     HHJ John Potter 2nd May 2017.  7 