      Southwark Crown Court   20 November 2012 Sentencing remarks of Mr. Justice Keith  R -v-Kweku Adoboli  Kweku Adoboli, whatever the verdicts of the jury would have been, you would forever have been known as the man who was responsible for the largest trading loss in British banking history.   The jury’s verdicts mean that what you did was criminal as well.   That    is not surprising.  In the last few months before your arrest, you amassed huge positions   when trading on behalf of the bank, well beyond your risk limits, and you did not protect  the bank from the risk of loss by hedging your trades.   I accept that you started to do  that in order to maximise the profits which the bank would make from your trading, and  the  effect  which  being  regarded  as  a  star  trader  would  have  on  your  bonus  and  your prospects for advancement within the bank was a secondary consideration only.   Nor do  I doubt that you were persuaded, despite your view that the market would fall, to trade  on the basis that the market would rally.  But the fact is that the market did fall.  Your   unhedged trading well beyond your risk limits resulted in the bank being exposed to the risk of enormous losses – at one stage to the risk of losses amounting to an unbelievable  $11.8bn.  And you then took larger and larger positions in a desperate attempt to recoup   those  losses.  Throughout  all  that,  you  concealed  what  you  were  doing  by  booking  fictitious  hedging  trades  to  give  the  back  office  the  impression  that  your  trades  were  hedged when they were not.  Once your positions had been unwound, the actual losses  which your trading caused still came to a colossal $2.25bn.      It goes without saying that you did not intend to cause that loss – or indeed any loss – to  the bank, but the loss arose out of the way you were trading, and you knew that the way you were trading would inevitably expose the bank to the risk of huge losses.  That is the  basis on which I am sure the jury convicted you of fraud in the later period of trading, and  the  sentence  which  I  shall  be  passing  in  respect  of  that  period  of  trading  has  to reflect that.  Having said that, your conviction on count 3, and not just on count 6, is   important.  Your  trading  in  the  period  to  which  count  3  relates  did  not  result  in  any  provable loss to the bank.   But your conviction on that count shows that your unhedged  trading was fraudulent from the outset, and not just in the period of trading when you amassed the huge positions which you did.   I appreciate that you have not disputed in this trial what you did.   The questions which   the jury had to address were why you did what you did, whether it amounted to an abuse of your position as a senior trader at one of the world’s leading investment banks, and whether  you  realised  at  the  time  that  what  you  were  doing  would  be  regarded  as  dishonest  by  the  standards  of  sensible  and  honest  people.    By  their  verdicts,  the  jury   have answered those questions, and in my opinion there were no other realistic verdicts  open to the jury on the two counts on which they have found you guilty.   I suspect that  the only reason why the jury acquitted you on the four counts of false accounting is that  they  were  not  sure  that  you  booked  the  fictitious  trades  predominantly  to  make  a financial gain for yourself.  Your acquittal on those counts therefore does not necessarily  mean  that  the  jury  must  have  thought  that  your  booking  of  the  fictitious  trades  might have been honest, and in any event the fictitious hedging trades you booked remain part of the picture of what your fraudulent trading involved.   I know that a basis of plea was   submitted  to  the  prosecution  shortly  after  your  arrest.    That  implies  that  you  were  at  least  considering  the  possibility  at  that  stage  of  admitting  that  your  conduct  was  dishonest.  It is a great pity that you eventually decided to maintain otherwise.     The  tragedy  for  you  is  that  you  had  everything  going  for  you.    Your  father  was  in  a  responsible  position  which  enabled  you  to  be  educated  at  a  private  school.    I  am  not  saying that you come from a privileged background, but you had some advantages that  other  people  do  not  enjoy.  In  addition,  you  had  your  own  natural  talents.      You  are highly intelligent.  You are plainly very articulate.  And as I told the jury, you appear to    have  a  considerable  amount  of  charm.  Your  fall  from  grace  as  a  result  of  these convictions  is  spectacular.    I  bear  in  mind  that  you  have  no  previous  convictions,  but  that  cannot  count  for  very  much  because  you  would  not  have  been  in  the  position  of  trust  you  occupied  at  UBS  if  you  had  previous  convictions.    The  fact  is  that  you  are  profoundly  unselfconscious  of  your  own  failings.    There  is  the  strong  streak  of  the  gambler in you, borne out by your personal trading.  You were arrogant enough to think  that the bank’s rules for traders did not apply to you.   And you denied that you were a   rogue  trader,  claiming  that  at  all  times  you  were  acting  in  the  bank’s  interests,  while conveniently ignoring that the real characteristic of the rogue trader is that he ignores the rules designed to manage risk. I am required by law to have regard to the guideline issued in October 2009 by the Sentencing Guidelines Council on sentencing for offences of fraud.  I have re-read the  guidance carefully, and I have taken it into account, but this case is far removed from the more common examples of fraud for which the guideline suggests various starting points for the sentencing judge or what the appropriate sentencing range should be.   The  maximum sentence for the crime of fraud by abuse of position is 10 years’ imprisonment, and you have been convicted of two such offences.   Taking everything  into account, I have concluded that you should go to prison for a total of 7 years.   On  count 3, you will go to prison for 4 years, and on count 6 you will go to prison for 7 years.  Both those terms will be served concurrently with each other making 7 years’  imprisonment in all.  You will serve half that sentence, but during the remainder of your  sentence you will be on licence, and if you do not comply with the terms of your licence, you can be returned to custody to serve the rest of your sentence.   The number of days  you have spent in custody on remand will count towards your sentence, as will half the number of days during which you were subject to an electronically-monitored curfew.   I  have been told that the former comes to 271 days, and half of the latter comes to 78 days, so that the number of days in total which will count towards your sentence is 349, or the correct number of days if the number of days I have been given turns out to be incorrect.    