 In the Oxford Crown Court  R   -v-Ben Blakeley  25 July 2014 Sentencing remarks of His Honour Judge Eccles Q.C. 1.	  Ben  Blakeley,  you  have  been  convicted  by  the  jury  of  the  offence  of  murder.    On  3rd      December 2013 you took Jayden Parkinson, a complicated but loving and vulnerable   17  year  old  girl,  into  open  country  near  Upton  and  in  the  dark  of  an  early  winter’s  evening  you  murdered  her  by  strangulation.  There  is  only  one  sentence  for  this    offence and it is life imprisonment. It is my duty however to specify under Schedule 21  to  the  Criminal  Justice  Act  2003  the  minimum  period  you  must  spend  in  prison  before  being  considered  for  parole  and  in  doing  so  I  have  to  identify  those  features  which aggravate your crime and those which may, to a very small extent, mitigate it. 2.	  I also have to sentence you on Count 2 of the indictment for the offence of doing acts   tending and intended to pervert the course of public justice. To this offence you have  pleaded  guilty  on  the  basis  that  you  buried  the  body  of  Jayden  Parkinson  in  the    graveyard  at  All  Saints  Church,  Didcot  to  prevent  the  police  from  discovering  her  whereabouts. 3.	  First,  I  have  to  identify  the  starting  point  for  assessing  the  appropriate  minimum   term. Given that no weapon was used and that there are no circumstances that would  place  this  offence  in  the  more  serious  categories  referred  to  in  Schedule  21  the   statutory starting point is one of 15 years.       4.  There are however in  my  judgment two  matters which require a  significant increase  on that starting point. The first is the violent nature of your relationship with Jayden  Parkinson, a vulnerable young person, and the second is your conduct after you had killed her, in particular the heartless and distressing way in which you disposed of and   concealed her body. I bear in mind that the second matter is encompassed by Count 2  on the indictment for which a concurrent sentence of imprisonment must be imposed.  5.	  I  am  satisfied  on  the  evidence  given  at  your  trial  that  you  were  both  physically  and    emotionally  abusive  towards  Jayden  Parkinson.  By  your  own  candid  admission  you  were unreasonably jealous during your relationship and unfairly suspected Jayden of  being unfaithful when she was not. You dominated and controlled her every day life  by  demanding  that  she  should  have  no  contact  with  other  young  men;  you  removed  her phone so she could not contact others, and when she was at the hostel at One Foot   Forward you demanded that she stay in her room, even to the extent of forbidding her  for a while from using the toilet, with the result that she had to urinate in milk bottles.    There  is  evidence  that  satisfies  me  that  there  were  occasions  when  you  argued  with  Jayden  when  you  assaulted  her  with  slaps,  punches,  kicks,  stamps  and  bites;  and  there  were  dangerous  attacks  upon  Jayden  Parkinson  when  you  squeezed  her  neck  with enough force to leave marks. In a fit of jealous pique, when you heard that she  had been intimate with  another young man you deliberately sought to humiliate her   by threatening to upload private and explicit images of her onto the internet. Yet, like   so  many  victims  of  domestic  violence  Jayden  was  infatuated  with  you,  her  violent abuser,  and  found  it  difficult  to  separate  emotionally  from  you;  she  may  not  have  a  been  a  perfect  young  woman  but  you  deliberately  and  selfishly  encouraged  her  emotional  dependence  on  you  by  manipulating  her  feelings  through  fear  and neediness.  6.	  At length in November 2013 Jayden Parkinson, with the help of the support staff at   One Foot Forward, found the will-power to end her relationship with you and there is  cogent  evidence  that  she  became  much  happier  and  more  confident  when  she  had Page 2 of 6  taken that decision and was looking forward to a new and better life. Unfortunately,  she discovered that she was pregnant and that you were the father, but being a decent young woman she wished to inform you of that fact and to offer you the chance in due  course of seeing your child.  I am satisfied on all the evidence I have heard that she     was in fact pregnant with your child but you utterly refused to believe her, and I am  also satisfied that on the 3rd December Jayden Parkinson only went out to meet you,  against the advice of staff at the hostel, in order to persuade you of the truth about her  condition. You then bullied her emotionally into denying her own pregnancy and you manipulated  her  feelings  so  that  she  felt  she  had  no  choice  but  to  go  with  you  to Didcot  and  then  into  the  fields  where  she  met  her  end.  At  the  time  you  were  in  my  judgment consumed with anger, having found out that Jayden had been intimate with  another young man after she had broken off her relationship with you. 7.	  There you strangled her to death in a jealous rage and is doing so gave no thought to  the possibility that she might indeed have been carrying your child. 8.	  I make it clear now that although you have demonstrated a pattern of abusive violence      in other relationships your sentence is not increased by the way you behaved towards  your other girlfriends, because those offences are not before this court; but emotional and physical abuse of the order I have described towards Jayden Parkinson is in my judgment a significantly aggravating factor. 9.	  I turn now to the way you conducted yourself after killing Jayden Parkinson. To every      reasonable  enquiry  by  police  officers  and  others  about  the  disappearance  of  Jayden  you  responded  with  foul  mouthed  abuse  in  which  you  created  a  web  of  lies  about  where  she  might  be,  accompanied  by  obscene  imprecations  that  you  did  not  care  where she was and that she meant nothing to you.  It required a heart of stone to keep  up that pretence, and a heart of stone as well to deal with her body in the way you did.   I accept your evidence and that of your brother Jake that you first concealed her body  in a ditch close to the place where she was killed. It is clear that you later decided to Page 3 of 6  move her body, and to a limited extent I accept that you began to have feelings of guilt       about where you had buried her. 10. What,  however,  is  shocking  to  all  who  have  had  anything  to  do  with  the  police   investigation  and  subsequent  trial  is  the  knowledge  that  in  the  early  hours  of  the morning  of  the  9th  December  2013  you  returned  to  that  ditch  and  dug  up  Jayden   Parkinson’s  body.  You  then  crammed  the  mortal  remains  of  poor  Jayden  into  a suitcase  and  having  prepared  a  false  story  to  explain  your  actions  persuaded  an  unwitting  taxi  driver  to  help  you  transport  her  body  to  All  Saints  Church  in  Didcot.  There,  with  the  assistance  of  your  younger  brother  you  had  dug  a  grave  for  Jayden over  the  interred  body  of  your  uncle  Alan,  and  before  dawn  of  that  day  you  tipped Jayden  Parkinson  into  that  grave,  with  her  legs  folded  behind  and  tucked  into  her underwear, and covered her up. Though in your twisted mind you may possibly have  thought that a graveyard was a better place for Jayden to be buried than a ditch in a   field,  there  was  no  hint  of  respect  or  remorse  in  this  hasty  interment  and  I  am convinced that your primary purpose was to prevent anyone else from ever knowing   what had happened to Jayden Parkinson. 11.  Jayden Parkinson’s burial in this way is not only shocking for all who have listened to    the  evidence,  but  it  was  and  always  will  be  an  intensely  distressing  memory  for  her family;  her  poor  father  passed  away  just  before  this  trial  and  he  must  have  been   haunted before he died by the thought of what you had done to his daughter. I have   read and heard the Victim Personal Statements written by Jayden’s mother and sister and express my appreciation of the moving way in which their grief and pain has been   described. In addition to the distress experienced by Jayden’s family it should in my  view  not  be  overlooked  that  in  concealing  her  body  in  a  grave  in  a  churchyard  you have also caused the priest in charge and the parishioners whose relatives lie at rest to  be upset at the sacrilege done to the memory of those buried there.   12.  A  further  relevant  consideration  to  my  mind  is  that  you  involved  your  younger  brother  Jake  in  concealing  Jayden’s  body  both  in  the  ditch  and  then  in  the  Page 4 of 6 churchyard.  You  have  been  involved  in  petty  crime  for  much  of  your  life  but  he,   despite looking up to you, managed to avoid any serious offending until you called on him  to  help  you  after  Jayden  had  been  murdered.  From  the  witness  box  you  rightly  acknowledged  that  you  have  now  ruined  Jake’s  life,  but  in  December  last  year  you  cared not one jot for the trouble you were causing him by demanding his assistance.  Whether or not Jake knew that the hole he helped to dig in the churchyard was for the    burial of Jayden Parkinson, a matter about which the jury have been unable to agree, you bear the responsibility for involving him.  13.  Having said all that, I have to bear in mind that despite all the hurt you have caused   and  all  the  public  outrage  at  your  wicked  behaviour,  the  increase  in  the  minimum   term  must  be  proportionate  to  the  statutory  starting  position  and  must  take  into  account any proper points to be made in mitigation. There are in my view four such points. First, I accept that you did not intend to kill Jayden Parkinson but to cause her   grievous bodily harm.   Secondly,  I  accept that  the offence  was not premeditated  but  was  impulsive.  Thirdly,  I  believe  that  the  confession  you  wrote  in  prison  was motivated  by  some  beginnings  of  compassion  and  it  was,  as  the  record  shows, followed by a formal acceptance that you were responsible for the unlawful killing of  Jayden,  though  sadly  not  by  a  plea  of  guilty  to  her  murder.  Fourthly,  though  in  the   context of what you have done these are but minor points, there is the clear emotional  damage done to you as a child, the fact that you were still only 22 years of age at the  time of the killing and the fact that within your relationship with Jayden there were times when you showed her kindness.   14.  How then is the minimum term to be appropriately assessed? In calculating the uplift   for the offence comprised in Count 2, namely the burial and concealment of Jayden’s  body to prevent apprehension for the offence of murder, R v Grimes [2012] 1 Cr App Rep (S) 97 is authority for the proposition that I should decide what the appropriate  determinate sentence should be on a plea of guilty to Count 2, and on the basis that  only half that sentence would be served in custody whereas the whole of a minimum  Page 5 of 6  term  must  be  served  before  eligibility  for  parole  arises,  I  must  then  increase  the starting point by half of that sentence.  15.  I  have	  been  referred  to  a  number  of  sentencing  appeal  decisions,  from  which  it    appears  that  the  top  of  the  sentencing  range  hitherto  for  a  comparable  offence  committed to avoid apprehension for murder has been 6 years after a plea of guilty;  see R v Lang [2002] 2 Cr App Rep (S) 15. [In the unreported case of R v Dennehy and others, 28 February 2014 I note that sentences of 15 years imprisonment after a trial  were  imposed  for  the  unlawful  burial  and  concealment  from  the  police  of  three  separate victims]. In my judgment the concealment of Jayden Parkinson’s body in a grave  in  a  churchyard  with  the  other  features  to  which  I  have  referred,  for  the purposes  of  avoiding  arrest  and  prosecution  for  murder,  makes  this  a  more  serious and  disturbing  case  than  Lang  justifying  a  greater,  though  not  a  disproportionately greater, sentence. 16.	  There  must  then  be  a  further  increase  to  mark  the  history  of  your  physical  and       emotional abuse of a vulnerable young woman, conduct which is to be condemned the more in the case of a man with a proved history of violent offending and petty crime.   In general terms that would warrant a further uplift of at least three years.  17.  Taking these two matters and the other aggravating circumstances into consideration,   and bearing in mind that sentences for murder are not mathematical exercises, I am  satisfied  that  before  making  an  allowance  for  your  mitigation  the  15  year  period  should be increased to 22 years and after making such allowance it should be one of 20 years, from which the time you have spent in custody on remand will be deducted.  The provisions for a victim surcharge will also apply.  18. Ben Blakeley, on Count 1 of the indictment you will be sentenced to life imprisonment   with  a  minimum  term  of  20  years  less  the  number  of  days  on  remand,  a  figure  that  will  be  calculated  administratively.  On  Count  2  you  will  be  sentenced  to  a  term  of eight years imprisonment concurrent. The existing community orders are revoked.   Page 6 of 6 