  R  v  Peter Johnson Jonathan Mathew Jay Vijay Merchant and Alex Pabon  Sentencing Remarks of HHJ Anthony Leonard QC  Southwark Crown Court  8th July 2016 On 3rd October 2014 you, Peter Johnson, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to defraud.    It  was  a  courageous  decision  and  in  what  is  the  third  trial involving  Libor,  you  are  the  first  defendant  to  enter  a  plea  of  guilty.  After a trial lasting just under three months the jury returned verdicts of guilty  against  you,  Jonathan  Mathew,  Jay  Merchant  and  Alex  Pabon.  You  do  not  receive  any  additional  sentence  because  you  decided  to contest the charge but you each lost the benefit which will be afforded to Johnson for his plea of guilty. This  prosecution,  put  shortly,  has  centred  on  you  as  Libor  submitters and  US  Dollar  traders  getting  together  to  manipulate  the  market  for your own benefit and, as a consequence, to the benefit of Barclays Bank.  You did it to improve the position on your own books knowing that was bound  to  cause  loss  to  the  counterparties.    That  was  because  each transaction  involved  a  zero  sum  gain;  whatever  you  gained,  the counterparty lost. The  actual  benefit  to  each  of  you  in  terms  of  an  increased  bonus  was small and is impossible to estimate.   I do not judge that was your true motivation.  However retaining your job or being promoted to the next level  at  the  bank  did  depend  on  making  a  profit  on  your  book, something which was under daily scrutiny at the bank.   1  1. 2. 3.  4. Each of you earned or could have earned in the future, if your career had flourished, very significant amounts of money: Johnson: your  income  and  bonus  rose  from  £630,000  in  2005  to £1,205,000 in 2007. Mathew: Your  income  rose  from  £109,500  in  2005  to  £280,750  in 2007. Merchant:  In 2005 your total income was £700,000 and by 2007 your annual salary and bonus reached £2,209,831. Pabon: In the full year 2005 you earned £183,933 and in the short period  you  worked  for  Barclays  in  2006  you  earned  a further £40,454.  5. 6. 7. It is clear from your annual self-assessments and from what you said in evidence that in your case, Mathew, you hoped for promotion.  In fact, when Johnson was promoted within the bank, you took over from him.  I  have  no  doubt  that  you  hoped  to  earn  as  much  as  he  did  in  the  long term. In  your  case,  Pabon,  I  am  satisfied  that  you  had  the  same  incentive  to improve  your  position  and  your  income.    However,  your  realisation  of what  Gourtay  and  your  own  trading  had  cost  Barclays  together  with finding yourself burnt out by the job, led you to think about leaving by March 2006, and doing so shortly afterwards.  It follows that both your income and your involvement in the fraud was less than that of your co-defendants, and that will be reflected in your sentence. I judge that there was a further factor which persuaded each of you on the dollar trading desk to manipulate the rates, and that was a desire to play the markets whilst influencing the result.  Trading was all about a fraction of a basis point here and a fraction there.  8. In  sentencing  Hayes,  Mr  Justice  Cooke  considered  that  it  was  hard  to overstate the seriousness of his conduct and observed that “High  standards  of  probity  are  to  be  expected  of  those  who operate  in  the  banking  system,  whether  they  are  bankers  in dealing  with  deposits  and  the  lending  of  money  or  traders  in  an investment  banking  context.    What  this  case  has  shown  is  the absence of that integrity that ought to characterise banking.”  29. 11. 12. 13. I respectfully agree with his remarks and add that the City has become a very  different  place  over  recent  years.    Sally  Scutt,  the  Deputy  Chief Executive of the British Bankers’ Association, said in evidence that when the  Financial  Services  and  Markets  Act  2000  came  into  force,  the  City moved away from an era where the motto of the City had been "my word is  my  bond".    She  said  that  it  was  beyond  people's  imagination  that anyone would deliberately abuse the Libor definition and use it for their own  purposes,  rather  than  for  the  public  good  and  to  ensure  that  the market ran in a professional way.  She said that there was a level of trust and  the  purpose  of  the  Libor  definition  was  not  to  take  one’s  own commercial interests into consideration. 10.  By their verdicts the jury has characterised your behaviour as dishonest as you must have known that it was. I  have  been  asked  to  consider  your  offending  as  being  in  a  different category  to  that  of  Hayes.    I  agree  that  there  are  real  and  significant differences  between  his  criminality  and  that  which  was  alleged  against you  collectively.   It  explains  why  the  sentencing  judge  imposed consecutive  sentences  which  took  his  total  sentence  to  14  years.  Although  that  was  reduced  on  appeal  to  11  years,  the  Court  of  Appeal accepted that his culpability was high, the harm serious and a deterrent element was plainly required.  They reduced the sentence to eight years on  the  charges  of  fraud  and  three  years  consecutive  in  relation  to another offence of conspiracy to defraud to take account of his age, non-managerial position and mild Asperger’s condition. In considering the appropriate sentences in respect of each of you, I am faced  by  the  same  difficulty  that  Mr  Justice  Cooke  faced,  that  the maximum  sentence  for  fraud  is  ten  years,  and  the  starting  point  for  a loss  of  £1  million  is  seven  years  which  leads  to  little  room  for differentiating between fraud involving loss in that amount and one that involves losses calculated the millions or in which the reputational effect of the fraud is grave. I  have  considered  the  Sentencing  Guidelines.    I  will  address  issues  of culpability and personal circumstances later, but first will deal generally with the question of loss caused or intended in respect of Harm A in the Definitive Guidelines.  It has been argued, in particular by Mr Davies QC on behalf of Merchant but adopted by others, that the loss or risk of loss ought  to  fall  into  category  3  or,  possibly  2  at  the  highest.    The submissions  are  based  on  the  fact  that  it  has  been  impossible  to calculate  the  actual  loss  in  this  case,  and  that  attempts  to  do  so  have produced  figures  which,  at  the  absolute  maximum,  come  to  $553,000 for the whole period.  In respect of Pabon, Mr Allen QC identifies that he  314. 15. 16. 17. 19. was  a  party  to  the  fraud  for  a  period  of  about  eight  months  and  the figure for him must be significantly less than that. In  my  judgment  the  actual  loss  or  risk  of  loss  does  not  realistically identify the harm caused by the criminal conduct in this case.  I am left in no doubt that you were all, for varying amounts of time, involved in a deliberate  plan  to  manipulate  the  rates  for  your  benefit  and  that  of Barclays as I have described. To  what  extent  you  caused  loss  to  others  was  dependent  on  factors outside your control.  It depended  largely on the Libor Rate submitted by the other 15 banks contributing to the setting of the Libor Rate and whether the rate put forward by Barclays was within the pack or at the extreme of the range where it could have most impact, together with the calculation  by  you,  Johnson,  and  by  you,  Mathew,  as  to  what  rate  you could submit without it being apparent that it was outside the range to such an extent that it might attract comment. It follows that I have no doubt that on each occasion that you as Dollar traders  asked  the  submitters  to  put  in  a  particular  rate,  or  indeed  to keep  it  unchanged,  it  was  done  to  cause  you  maximum  benefit  and, therefore, the counterparties maximum loss.  Whether it did so, and to what extent, was largely in the hands of others. I have concluded that the risk of loss can be judged to run into millions of pounds and, in accordance with the guidelines, falls within category 2 of  Harm  A.    Harm  B  does  not  apply  to  this  case  and  no  adjustment needs to be made. 18.  But in considering the appropriate sentence I need to have regard to any aggravating  features.    One  that  applies  to  you  all  is  the  undeniable evidence of community and wider impact.  Whether or not it continued to be used after Libor rigging became common knowledge, the effect on confidence  in  and  the  integrity  of  a  market  rate  which  is  relied  upon globally is at the heart of your criminality.   In assessing what effect that has on sentence I note that, whereas other guidelines  refer  to  factors  increasing  seriousness  resulting  in  an adjustment to sentence within the range (or within the range or where appropriate  outside  the  identified  category  range),  these  guidelines purposely state that I should identify whether any combination of these or any other relevant factors should result in "an upward or downward adjustment  from  the  sentence  arrived  at  so  far”.    That  flexibility  is designed  to  cope  with  a  case  such  as  this  where  reputational  damage may be greater than provable loss.  420. I have been asked to take into account that other traders have escaped criminal  prosecution  in  this  country  and  abroad  and  the  way  in  which two  traders  have  been  treated  by  the  American  courts.    I  decline  to  do so.    In  my  judgment  I  must  sentence  on  the  basis  of  the  criminality proved  against  you  and  in  accordance  with  the  sentencing  regime applicable in this country. 21.  You  are  each  of  good  character,  not  only  in  the  sense  of  having  no convictions but having positive good characters and I will take that into account in respect of each of you.  In respect of those to whom it applies, I  have  taken  into  account  what  was  said  or  written  about  you  by  the character  witnesses  who  were  called  in  the  trial  as  well  as  the  further references which I have been provided with.  I will take all that material into account in passing sentence. 22.  Although the period from charge to trial has been comparatively short I will, to some extent, take the time between the offences and the verdicts, being up to 11 years, into account.  23. I will now deal with each of you in turn.  I intend to start with you, Jay Merchant.    Because  I  accept  the  argument  put  forward  on  behalf  of Johnson and Mathew, that, although they were responsible for the Libor submissions,  it  was  only  in  response  to  the  requests  of  the  Dollar traders,  I  judge  you,  of  all  the  defendants,  to  bear  the  greatest responsibility for what happened. 24.  The  evidence  of  the  way  in  which  manipulation  of  the  rate  began  in earnest after you arrived in New York was compelling.  I do not suggest that you were the originator of the scheme, and it may well be that you got  the  idea  from  Fred  Gourtay  who  had  arrived  shortly  before  from another  bank.    It  was  under  your  leadership  on  the  desk  that  the requests to the Libor submitters really took off. 25.  On  the  evidence  put  before  jury,  I  do  not  judge  that  there  was  any manipulation being carried out by traders on other desks before it began on the New York Dollar desk.  Extensive searches of the unused material has  failed  to  turn  up  any  evidence  of  a  pre-existing  practice  of manipulation.  If there was, it must have been insignificant and Mathew, sitting at the cash desk was unaware of it. 26. In  respect  of  culpability,  your  offending  falls  into  Category  A,  “High Culpability”.  You played a leading rôle in that: (a) You abused a position of power, trust and responsibility,   5(b)  Although the part of your day taken up by making the request or getting others to make the request on your behalf may have been  comparatively  small,  it  required  you  to  make  careful involved calculations  of  what  the  rate  should  be  and sophistication and planning. (c) The  offending  was  carried  out  of  over  a  significant  period  of time, and (d)  There was a large number of victims. 27.  Together  with  my  finding  in  respect  of  the  harm  and  impact  of  your offending, that takes my sentence up to 8 years before considering any mitigating factors. 28.  You are in your mid 40’s.  In addition to what I heard about you during the trial, and which included your charitable acts, I take into account the references I was provided with.  I take into account that you may have to serve your sentence in this country because you do not have American citizenship  and  I  will  make  a  specific  further  reduction  in  your  case  to take that into account.  This conviction may affect your ability to obtain citizenship hereafter, and I am mindful  of that.  I take into account all that  has  been  said  on  your  behalf  and  in  particular  the  effect  on  your young family of your absence. 29.  Peter Johnson; in terms of culpability, you fit squarely into the bracket of “High Culpability” in that: (a) (b) (c) You  played  a  leading  rôle  as  the  senior  submitter  for  Dollar Libor I  judge  that  you  were  responsible  for  involving  Mathew,  not through  pressure  applied  on  him,  but  by  your  influence  over him as his mentor and senior. You abused your position of trust as the Libor submitter who should  have  put  in  a  rate  uninfluenced  by  the  requests  of  the traders. (d)  Although  the  part  of  your  day  taken  up  by  calculating  how  to respond  to  the  requests  made  of  you  when  submitting  the Libor Rate may have been comparatively small, it required you to  make  careful  calculations  of  what  the  rate  should  be  and involved sophistication and planning.   6(e) The  offending  was  carried  out  of  over  a  significant  period  of time, and (f) There was a large number of victims. 30.  Together  with  my  finding  in  respect  of  the  harm  and  impact  of  your offending,  and  acknowledging  that  yours  was  a  pivotal  rôle,  that  takes my sentence up to 7½  years before considering any mitigating factors. 31. 32. You are 61 years old.  I have read the many character references which attest to your good character and paint a picture of a caring family man, exceptionally generous with your time and with practical and emotional support to friends and those in need.  You have made use of your time since  leaving  Barclays  to  give  of  your  practical  skills  to  the  National Trust.  I have also taken into account what has been said about you as a banker by Mark Dearlove.  I take into account the effect that your plea of guilty has had on your personal and financial circumstances and all that has been said on your behalf. In addition to the time that has passed since the start of your offending, I will also take into account the time you have spent awaiting sentence through no fault of you own.  You have waited 20 months to know what sentence will be passed on you.  That amounts to a sentence in itself and I shall give you a further significant reduction in addition to that which you  will  receive  for  your  plea  of  guilty  to  reflect  the  trauma  you  have faced during that time. 33. Jonathan  Mathew:  in  terms  of  culpability,  you  fit  into  the  bracket  of “High Culpability” in that: (a) You abused your position of trust as the Libor submitter who should  have  put  in  a  rate  uninfluenced  by  the  requests  of  the traders. (b)  Although  the  part  of  your  day  taken  up  by  calculating  how  to respond  to  the  requests  made  of  you  when  submitting  the Libor Rate may have been comparatively small, it required you to  make  careful  calculations  of  what  the  rate  should  be  and involved sophistication and planning. (c) The  offending  was  carried  out  of  over  a  significant  period  of time, and (d)  There was a large number of victims.  734.  Together  with  my  finding  in  respect  of  the  harm  and  impact  of  your offending, but acknowledging your limited rôle standing in for Johnson when he was not in the office or assisting him when he was there, that the number of submissions you made was considerably less than those made  by  Johnson  and  that  you  were  led  into  this  offending,  albeit voluntarily  by  Johnson,  that  takes  my  sentence  to  5  years  before considering any mitigating factors. 35.  You are 35 years old.  I take into  account everything that your counsel has  said  on  your  behalf  and  in  particular  the  consequences  of  this prosecution on you and your family financially and emotionally.  I have read the additional letters of support from a friend and members of your family. 36.  Alex  Pabon:  in  terms  of  culpability,  you  fit  into  the  bracket  of  “High Culpability” in that: (a) You  abused  your  position  of  trust  as  a  trader  to  influence  the Libor Rate which was submitted. (b)  Although the part of your day taken up by making the request or getting others to make the request on your behalf may have been  comparatively  small,  it  required  you  to  make  careful involved calculations  of  what  the  rate  should  be  and sophistication and planning. (c) The  offending  was  carried  out  of  over  a  significant  period  of time  but  I  acknowledge  that  it  was  for  a  significantly  shorter time that Merchant, and (d)  There was a large number of victims. 37.  Together  with  my  finding  in  respect  of  the  harm  and  impact  of  your offending,  but  acknowledging  your  subordinate  rôle  and  the  short period  over  which  you  were  a  party  to  the  conspiracy  that  takes  my sentence  to  4  years  before  considering  any  mitigating  factors.    In reaching that sentence I have had in mind that the reason that you left banking  had  nothing  to  do  with  any  realisation  on  your  part  that  you should not pursue this fraudulent and dishonest conduct.  38.  You are now aged 37.  I take into account everything that has been said on  your  behalf  and  in  particular  the  effect  on  your  family  of  losing  the primary  carer  for  your  son,  your  father’s  physical  position,  the  overall effect on your family and you personally of this conviction.  I shall make  8a  small  extra  reduction  to  reflect  that  you  may  serve  part  of  your sentence in this country remote from your family. 39.  You will serve one half of the sentences I am about to pass in custody.  You will then be released on licence for the remainder of your sentence.  While  you  are  on  licence  you  must  comply  with  its  conditions  and commit  no  further  offence  or  you  will  be  liable  to  be  recalled  and  you will then serve the remainder of your sentence in custody. 40.  The surcharge provisions apply to this case and the orders will be drawn up accordingly.   41.  The offence is so serious that only a custodial sentence can be justified and  the  least  possible  sentence  I  can  impose  having  regard  to  the aggravating  and  mitigating  factors  of  the  case  which  I  have  set  out together with everything that your counsel has said on your behalf are as follows:- Peter  Johnson:  I  reduce  your  sentence  to  reflect  your  personal circumstances,  the  period  of  time  which  has  elapsed  since  your offending, and the time you have waited to be sentenced by 18 months to which I apply a one third reduction for your plea of guilty.  You will go to prison for 4 years Jonathan Mathew: you will go to prison for 4 years. Jay Vijay Merchant: you will go to prison for 6½ years. Alex Pabon: you will go to prison for 2 years and 9 months.  -ENDS-  9