R v William Cornick   Leeds Crown Court  3 November 2014    Sentencing Remarks       Mr Cornick, you may remain seated.    Introduction These  sentencing  remarks  will  be  divided  into  seven  sections.    The  first  three  sections  are  general.    They  will concern  the  victim,  Mrs  Ann  Maguire;  the  defendant, William  Cornick;  and  the  details  of  the  murder.    The remaining  four  sections  will  be  addressed  directly  to  the defendant  although  he  need  only  stand  for  the  last  one.   They  concern  the  mechanics  of  the  sentence  that  I  am  to impose;  the  aggravating  factors;  the  mitigating  factors;  and my conclusion as to the appropriate sentence.    1. Mrs Ann Maguire Sometimes it  can  seem inappropriate for  a judge’s sentencing remarks in a murder case to focus on the victim.  There  can  be  an  uncomfortable  tension  between  a  full explanation  of the  sentence  being imposed  on the defendant,  and  the  court’s  wish  to  describe  the  qualities  of the  person  who  has  been  murdered,  in  order  to  give  a proper sense of the loss that the killing has caused.   1 However,  no  such  difficulty  exists  here.  Ann  Maguire  was such  a  remarkable  person  that  it  is  only  right  that  I  start these  observations  by  focussing  on  her  personality  and  her achievements.  She  was  61  and  had  been  a  teacher  at Corpus  Christi  Catholic  College  in  Leeds  for  four  decades.   She was genuinely loved by her pupils.  The court has seen today  some  of  the  interviews  with  those  children  who  had  seen  her  murdered.    Notwithstanding  the  appalling  events  that  they  had  recently  witnessed,  many  of  them  wanted  to say something about how wonderful Ann Maguire was, both as a teacher and as a person.    Just by way of example, we heard one pupil describe her as “really  caring…she  sort  of  couldn’t  do  enough  for  people, she  was  just  really  lovely  to  everybody.”    Another  pupil described  her  as  “more  of  a  friend  than  a  teacher”.  And another,  when  asked  what  she  was  like,  said  “she  were wonderful.  She were just…she was so nice to everyone, she  were  kind,  she’d  always  stay  back  late…her  main  goal  for everyone in that class, she just wanted them to come on top and  achieve  what  she  knew  they  could  achieve  and  you  could  tell  she  loved  it.    You  could  tell  that  she  loved  doing what she were doing every day.” Similar  views  were  expressed  by  her  teaching  colleagues.  Susan  Francis,  the  Head  of  Languages  at  the  school,  who  bravely  intervened  during  the  attack  on  Ann  Maguire, described her as both “wonderful” and “fantastic”.  Another    2 teacher  at  the  school,  who  in  other  circumstances  might have  been  an  additional  victim  of  the  defendant,  described   Ann  Maguire  as  “an  amazing  woman  and  teacher”. Numerous  people  have  spoken  about  how  much  she  loved her job and how much, in return, her pupils loved her. Her  family  have  given  moving  evidence  of  her  numerous qualities. Her brother in law Brian, described her as “a shining light.  She  trod  her  own  path  and  lit  up  our  lives  in  so  many  different ways.  She was a joy to be with.”  Another brother in law, Tom, described “her shining, fun, bright personality, which  drew  people  to  her  and  when  you  were  in  her company  you  always  felt  you  were  the  most  important person in her world.” Her sister Denise said that Ann was not just her big sister, but  was  “my  carer,  my  protector,  my  teacher,  my confidante, my role model, the person who inspired me most  and  in  the  last  20  years  she  became  my  best  friend  in  life. Ann  was  genuinely  one  of  life’s  beautiful,  selfless, extraordinary, kind people.  She radiated happiness, joy and  positivity.  Her  smile  lit  up  the  room  and  people  wanted  to be  around  her,  they  were  attracted  to  her  energy  and  zest for life.” And her daughter Emma said:      3 “She  was  a  wonderful  mother.    She  gave  us  so  much love.  I never felt alone in life…. She felt every up and down  with  me  and  perhaps  more  acutely.    She  was stronger  than  all  of  us  put  together  and  carried  us through  many  of  life’s  many  challenges.   She  was  an extraordinary person.” Given all of this, it is perhaps unsurprising that Leeds Town Hall  was  full  to  overflowing  for  Mrs  Maguire’s  memorial  service on 29 September 2014. For those of us who never met Mrs Maguire or never had the good fortune to be taught by her, the devastation felt at her death is difficult to imagine.  But some sense at least of the pain and loss felt by her family can be found in their Victim Impact  Statements.  It  is  impossible  to  do  them  full  justice in  these  sentencing  remarks.  But  I  incorporate  into  them the following passages: Her sister Denise said: “I  am  overcome  with  an  overwhelming  sense  of  loss and injustice.  The fact [was] that Ann was at her place  of  work  doing  her  job  in  order  to  improve  the  lives  of children,  stretching  them  to  achieve  the  best  results they  could  in  their  up  and  coming  exams,  and  she didn't  come  home,  and  never  will  again.    I’m  haunted with thoughts that her life was taken in a place where  she felt her safest, most comfortable, respected and in command.    I’m  angry  that  she  was  denied  the opportunity to enjoy the retirement she had worked so  hard  for  and  was  so  deserved  of  after  41  years  of dedicated  service  as  a  public  servant.    I’m  angry  that she  will  never  meet  her  future  grandchildren  and  be able  to  nurture  and  guide  them  the  way  she  did  with     4 all the other children that were an integral part of her life.” And her daughter, Emma, said: “There  are  many  milestones  she  will  miss  and  many that  we  will  have  to  get  through  missing  her.  We  will no longer look forward to occasions, our loss shadows such  things.  No  birthday,  Christmas,  Mother’s  day, weekend  home  will  ever  be  the  same:  everything  is tainted now.  I just want to be able to talk to her.  She won’t  see  me  get  married  or  hold  her  first  grandchild, this  part  of  her  life  was  all  still  to  come,  she  was  so looking forward to it.  She deserved to live.”  Finally, there are the words of Ann’s husband, Don. “As  a  young  girl  Ann  visited  the  sick  and  helped  the  elderly  in  her  local  community.    The  hundreds  or maybe  thousands  of  wonderful  tributes  paid  over  the  months are testament to the person Ann Maguire.  The guidance  for  preparing  a  victim  impact  statement advises to avoid turning the victim of the crime into a kind of saint.  Such advice does not apply in this case.   Ann was a beautiful vivacious, caring generous human being.  She  was  unique  among  peers  and  family.    We met  and  fell  in  love  in  the  spring  of  1972.    We  were  a very  quiet  private  couple  constantly  dreaming  of  a  rural  backwater  but  the  world  seemed  to  shatter  our hopes  at  regular  intervals.    Now  all  dreams  have  gone forever.  I am still a Dad but I cannot help my children understand; can’t help them come to terms; can’t help    Mummy  would  have  been  much lessen  the  pain.I better.  I  can  no  longer  be  a  Dad.    I  fail  every  day.     need Ann.  Parts of our lives have been brutally taken. The centre of our lives is missing.  Our very being has been  diminished.    Facing  the  world  is  very  difficult. Facing one’s self is very difficult.”      5 It  is  therefore  all  the  more  inexplicable  that  this  loved  and loving  woman  was  the  person  for  whom  William  Cornick conceived such an irrational and all-consuming hatred; the person that he planned to kill, and then killed – in a public  place – in front of children – in such a brutal and cowardly way on 28th April 2014.  2. William Cornick William  Cornick  was  born  on  26  June  1998,  so  he  was  in Year 11, and two months short of his 16th birthday when he  killed  Ann  Maguire.  He  was  the  son  of  responsible  and caring  parents  and  his  family  life  was  marked  by  love  and support.  He was successful at school and was in his GCSE year,  having  already  taken  and  passed  five  exams  a  year  early.  He  was  regarded  as  reserved,  but  amicable,   enthusiastic,  and  a  conscientious  member  of  the  pupil  group.  Although  he  was  diagnosed  with  diabetes  in  2010,  which  meant  that  he  would  be  unable  to  pursue  an intended  career  in  the  army,  it  does  not  appear  that  this diagnosis had any other significant effect on his personality.     However,  as  he  advanced  through  his  teenage  years,  it became apparent to some of his friends that his personality  was  disturbed.    He  began  to  experience  increasing  feelings of  anger,  mainly  directed  at  Ann  Maguire,  and  all  of  them completely  irrational.  He  spoke  to  a  number  of  his  friends about  killing  her  and  at  least  one  other  teacher  at  the school.  He told them he had taken to carrying a knife and,    6  after  the  murder,  the  police  discovered  many  images  of knives  on  his  mobile  phone.    He  said  later  that  the  killing had been always on his mind for three years, since Year 8.    By Christmas 2013 it was apparent to Mr Cornick’s mother that her son had a problem with Mrs Maguire, although she did not know that late on Christmas Eve, and into the early  hours of Christmas Day, he was exchanging messages with a friend on Facebook in which he spoke of “brutally killing” Mrs  Maguire  and  then  spending  the  rest  of  his  life  in  jail.  These  angry  feelings  led  to  a  confrontation  of  a  sort  with  Mrs Maguire in February 2014 when the defendant’s hatred of his teacher was apparent to all those present at a meeting  at  the  school.  He  was  placed  on  internal  exclusion  in consequence of his disrespect and rudeness.    On  25  February  2014,  shortly  after  this  meeting  and  just two months before the killing, he sent a message to a friend on Facebook that said of Ann Maguire:   “…the  one  absolute  fucking  bitch  that  deserves  more than  death  more  than  pain  torture  and  more  than anything that we can understand.”   After  the  killing,  William  Cornick  was  the  subject  of extensive  psychiatric  and  psychological  examination.    The results  of  those  examinations  make  chilling  reading.    In particular: (a)	  Dr  Diggle  is  an  adolescent  clinical  psychologist.    He  concluded  that  William  Cornick  generally  experiences    7  strong feelings of anger but there was little sign of that  in  his  outward  presentation.  He  had  a  very  high disposition to  experience  anger  without  specific provocation  and  his  ability  to  manage  his  angry thoughts constructively was limited. (b)	  Dr Lengua, a consultant child and adolescent forensic   psychiatrist,  described  William  Cornick’s  anger  as  “premeditated  and  predatory”  and  that  one  of  the dangerous  aspects  of  his  personality  was  that  his outward  appearance  did  not  disclose  his  anger.    He  concluded  that  the  defendant’s  actions  leading  up  to the  killing  of  Mrs  Maguire  were  “pre-planned,  goal directed, and in full knowledge that they were wrong.”    He concluded that William Cornick posed an extremely high risk of serious violence and could not exclude the possibility that the defendant would kill again.   (c)	  Dr  Kent  was  the  prosecution’s  leading  psychiatric   expert.  He  concluded  that  William  Cornick  was  at  least  of  average  intelligence  and  found  no  evidence  of any  thought  disorder,  psychotic  or  other  major  psychiatric  illness.  Dr  Kent  said  that  the  defendant  had an adjustment disorder (something with which Dr  Lengua agreed) and that this affected the development  of his personality at a time when he should have been developing  and  maturing  into  an  independent  person. He noted “a gross lack of empathy for his victim and a degree  of  callousness  rarely  seen  in  clinical  practice.”   He  found  evidence  of  personality  disorder  with  some  8 marked  psychopathic  traits  with a preoccupation  with homicide.  He said he presented a risk of serious harm  to  the  public  and  that  the  risk  was  immediate  and  unpredictable,  and  could  cause  serious  and  lethal injury. There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  defendant  is  highly dangerous.  His  complete  lack  of  remorse,  which  is  a  significant feature of all of the psychiatric and psychological  evidence,  is  a  matter  to  which  I  will  return  later  in  these remarks.    For  completeness,  I  should  say  that  I  have  read all  the  reports  dealing  with  the  defendant,  including  the useful PSR from the Leeds Youth Offending Service.  3. The Murder of Ann Maguire As I have already noted, the defendant had long planned to  kill Ann Maguire.  To Dr Kent, he said that on Thursday, 24  April, he had decided that he would kill her rather than kill himself.  He  said  he  knew  he  was  going  to  kill  her  and  on  the Sunday he decided that it was going to be with a knife,  rather  than  the  other  options  that  he  had  considered,  including a blunt object, a gun, and pushing her out of the window.    Despite  this  level  of  planning,  his  outward appearance  was  polite  and  happy  throughout  the  weekend of 26 and 27 April 2014. On the morning of Monday 28 April he went to school with two knives in his bag.  One was a large and heavy knife with     9 a  cutting  edge  measuring  21cm  in  length  and  up  to  4.5cm in width.  In addition to a smaller knife, he also had a bottle of  Jack  Daniels  with  which  he  was  going  to  celebrate  after the killing. During that morning, he told a number of his fellow pupils that  he  intended  to  kill  Ann  Maguire  and  whilst  many  did not  take  him  seriously,  others  did,  and  at  one  point  he  threatened  to  kill  anyone  who  revealed  his  plan.    It  was plain  that  he  was  excited  by  the  thought  of  what  he  was going  to  do.  He  told  at  least  one  other  pupil  that  he intended  to  kill  two  other  teachers  as  well,  including  a female  teacher  who  was  pregnant,  and  who  he  intended  to stab in the stomach so as to kill her unborn child. The  attack  took  place  in  the  first  lesson  after  the  morning break,  just  after  11:30am.    William  Cornick  attended  Mrs  Maguire’s  Spanish  lesson  in  classroom  T51.    Some  of  the class,  including  William  Cornick,  then  went  to  classroom T50  so  they  could  work  more  productively.    There,  William Cornick  showed  a  fellow  pupil  the  larger  of  the  two  knives and  experimented  with  where  to  conceal  it.    He  then  left that  classroom,  winking  at  his  classmate  as  he  left,  and went back to T51.     Mrs  Maguire  was  at  her  desk  at  the  front  of  the  class, helping  a  pupil.  She  was  leaning  away  from  William Cornick  when  he  entered  the  room.  William  Cornick     10  approached Mrs Maguire from behind and began to stab her in the neck and back from behind.  She was 5’2” and of slim build;  the  defendant  was  a  foot  taller  than  her  and  armed  with  the  large  kitchen  knife  to  which  I  have  previously referred.  The  attack  was  relentless,  brutal  and  cowardly.  Mrs Maguire fled but Cornick pursued her, stabbing her as she sought to escape him.    Susan  Francis  came  out  of  an  adjacent  workroom  to  be confronted by a group of pupils running down the corridor, screaming in panic.  She saw Ann Maguire running towards her,  holding  the  back  of  her  neck  and  saying  “he  stabbed me  in  the  neck”.    Susan  Francis  pushed  Mrs  Maguire  into the workroom, and shut the door, courageously holding her foot  against  it  to  stop  the  defendant  coming  in.    Cornick then turned and walked away.  He  went  back  to  the  classroom  he  had  left  and  sat  down next to his classmate as if nothing had happened.  He said he  had  stabbed  Mrs  Maguire,  and  added  that  it  was  a  pity she was not dead.  He said out loud to the entire class “good times”,  and  spoke  of  an  adrenalin  rush.    The  evidence   makes  clear  that  he  was  pleased  with  what  he  had  done.  He  was  subsequently  taken  by  two  teachers  to  the  school  foyer and they waited for the police to arrive.  Cornick talked to  everyone  as  if  nothing  had  happened  and  many  of  those  involved were to speak later of his bizarre calmness and air of normality.    11      Ann Maguire was still alive in the workroom. Susan Francis comforted her but was only too aware that she was probably  dying,  so  she  spoke  to  her  about  her  children  and  the  fact  that  she  was  loved.  An  ambulance  was  called  but  on  the way  to  the  hospital  Mrs  Maguire  stopped  breathing  and never thereafter  regained  consciousness.  She  was pronounced  dead  at  Leeds  General  Infirmary  at  1:10in  the afternoon. The  subsequent  post  mortem  identified  that  she  had  been stabbed seven times to the upper back and neck.  One stab caused the knife to pass all the way through the lower neck and  another  severed  the  jugular  vein.    Two  other  stabs shattered  ribs  and  one  of  those  penetrated  her  right  lung.  All  of  the  wounds  were  inflicted  from  behind  and  the pathologist  concluded  that  many  were  inflicted  with  severe force.  The  experienced  paramedic  who  attended  to  Mrs Maguire  described  the  stab  wounds  as  the  worst  she  had ever seen.  4. The Mechanics of the Sentence  William  Cornick,  you  may  remain  seated  but  the  following remarks are addressed directly to you. The  sentence  for  murder  is  automatic:  given  your  age,  it  is  detention  during  Her  Majesty’s  pleasure.    That  is  an 12 indeterminate sentence; it is, to all intents and purposes, a life sentence. The  only  remaining  matter  for  me  is  to  fix  the  minimum term that you will serve.  I should make quite clear that this  means what it says: it is the minimum period that you will  serve  in  detention  before  you  are  even  considered  for release.  This minimum term cannot be reduced or changed  or cut down in any way.  Moreover, after it has been served, there  is  no  guarantee  whatsoever  that  you  will  then  be  released. You will only be released thereafter once the Parole Board  decides  that  you  no  longer  pose  a  danger  to  the public.  Given the psychiatric and psychological reports that I  have  read,  it  is  quite  possible  that  that  day  will  never come.  Pursuant  to  paragraph  7  of  Schedule  21  of  the  Criminal Justice  Act  2003,  Parliament  has  decided  that  the  starting point for the minimum term for anyone under 18 convicted  of murder, is 12 years.  Having adopted that as my starting  point,  as  I  am  obliged  to  do,  I  then  turn  to  the  aggravating and mitigating factors.  5. Aggravating Factors. In my view, there are seven significant aggravating factors. First,  there  is  your  extensive  premeditation  and  planning.  You  decided  to  kill  Ann  Maguire  months  before  you  did  so      13 and you openly fantasised about it.  The plan to kill her was formulated  long  before  the  act  itself,  and  included  a consideration  of  possible  weapons  and  methods.  You eventually  decided  some  days  before  the  event  that  you  would  stab  her  to  death  at  your  school.    You  took  two knives  with  you,  just  in  case.  In  every  respect,  this  was  a long way from a killing on the spur of the moment.   Secondly, you took a knife to the classroom with the express purpose  of  killing  Mrs  Maguire.  If  you  were  over  18,  that would give rise to a starting point for the minimum term of 25  years. I  do  not  agree  with  the  submission  that  a consideration  of  this  starting  point  is  wholly  irrelevant  to your sentencing exercise. Whilst, as I have said, it is not the  applicable starting point in your case, its substantial length demonstrates  Parliament’s  intention  to  punish  severely those,  like  you,  who  take  easily-available  household  knives to  the  scene  of  the  crime  in  order  to  carry  out  a  planned killing.  Thirdly, Mrs Maguire plainly suffered before she died: death was not instantaneous and the severity of the stab wounds demonstrates  the  pain  that  she  would  have  suffered  before  she  died.    Moreover,  it  is  plain  that  both  she  and  Susan Francis knew she was dying as she lay in the workroom.   Fourthly,  Mrs  Maguire  was  a  teacher,  teaching  a  GCSE Spanish  class  at  a  well-known  and  well-respected  Leeds     14 school.  She was therefore fulfilling a public duty.  Teachers play  a  critical  role  in  our  society  and  are  in  an  important position of authority.  They are entitled to proper protection, and  to  expect  that  those  who  injure  or  kill  their  colleagues are dealt with severely by the courts.  Fifthly,  this  was  a  killing  which  you  deliberately  chose  to commit  in  public.  You  killed  Mrs  Maguire  in  front  of  a  classroom  of  horrified  15  and  16  year  olds.    The  damage done  to  them  is  incalculable.    Many  may  be  traumatised  forever by what they saw. Your complete lack of empathy for them, your callous disregard for your classmates, is perhaps  the  worst  single  element  in  this  catalogue  of  aggravating factors.  Sixthly,  the  level  of  violence  was  savage  and  cowardly.  It was an attack on a petite woman in her 60’s by a strapping teenager  armed  with  a  large  knife.  It  was  carried  out  from behind.  It  was  a  sustained  attack  because  even  when  Mrs Maguire got away from you, you followed her and continued to stab her.   Finally, you have shown a total and chilling lack of remorse. Your lack of remorse was made plain to both Dr Diggle and Dr Lengua.  And to Dr Kent, you said: I “I  knew  what  I  was  going  to  do;  it  was  what  I  did.   said  I  was  going  to  do  other  stuff  but  I  never  got  the chance, other murders.  It was a triple homicide.  What I have done, I couldn’t give a shit…I wasn’t in shock, I     15 was happy.  I had a sense of pride.  I still do.  I know it’s  uncivilised  but  I  know  it’s  incredibly  instinctual and human.  Past generations of life, killing is a route It’s  kill  or  be  killed.    I  did  not  have  a of  survival. choice.  It was kill her or suicide.”  When  asked  by  Dr  Kent  about  the  impact  of  the  killing  of Mrs Maguire’s family and on the wider community, you said “I  couldn’t  give  a  shit…I  know  the  victim’s  family  will  be upset  but  I  don’t  care.  In  my  eyes,  everything  I’ve  done  is fine  and  dandy.”    At  one  stage,  you  described  Mrs  Maguire as “barely human”.   In my view, these remarks – your pride in what you did, and  your  complete  lack  of  remorse  –  are  truly  grotesque,  and  a  further significant aggravating factor which I must reflect in the sentence. In my view, these aggravating factors more than double the statutory  starting  point  of  12  years  and,  prior  to  any consideration  of  the  mitigating  factors,  would  lead  to  a minimum term of 25 years.  6. Mitigating Factors In my view, there are three mitigating factors. First,  there  is  your  guilty  plea.    As  a  matter  of  law,  the  maximum  credit  I  could  give  you  is  around  4  years  (one sixth of 25). However, whilst I agree that some credit is due   for  your  plea,  I  do  not  think  that  it  can  be  the  maximum.      16 There were numerous witnesses to the murder itself, so you  could  not  sensibly  have  denied  the  act  of  killing.  And  as  to the mental element of the offence, the agreed position is that your  adjustment  disorder  cannot  affect  your  criminal  culpability.  So  in  my  view  whilst  there  must  be  credit  for your  plea  –  which  on  any  view  was  early  –  should  be  no  more  than  2  years,  thereby  reducing  the  minimum  term  to 23 years.  Secondly,  there  is  the  adjustment  disorder  itself.  Although, as I have said, it is properly accepted that this has no effect on  your  criminal  culpability,  it  is  not  a  condition  for  which you or your family can be blamed. I accept therefore that it is  a  mitigating  factor  and  should  have  some  effect  on  the minimum term. Thirdly,  I  accept  that,  because  you  were  15  years  and  10 months  old  at  the  time  of  the  killing,  such  extreme  youth may not be fully accounted for in the 12 year starting point. That  applies  to  everyone  under  18,  and  so  could  therefore apply  to  somebody  two  years  older  than  you  were  at  the time of the killing.  In my view, these two further mitigating factors reduce the minimum term to one of 20 years.  I should add that, having made a reduction for your youth, I consider that it is inappropriate to make a further reduction  for  your  good  character,  which  is  principally  a  function  of your  youth.  And  whilst  I  have  considerable  sympathy  for     17 your parents, who cannot be held responsible in any way for what  you  did,  and  whose  statements  demonstrate  the devastation  you  have  visited  on  them  too,  it  would  be inappropriate  to  reduce  the  term  further  because  of  the  effect  a  lengthy  term  will  have  on  your  family.  That  was something  you  should  have  considered  before  you  decided to  kill  Mrs  Maguire.  Instead,  just  like  your  classmates,  you completely ignored  the  effect  of  your  crime  and its consequences  upon  them.  And  whilst  I  do  not  doubt  their ability  to  support  your  possible  reform  and  rehabilitation,  ultimately  that  can  only  come  from  you.  Thus  far,  I  am  bound  to  note  that  you  have  failed  to  show  any  signs  of  The  three  mitigating  factors  which  I  accept,  when  taken together,  reduce  the  25  years  to  a  minimum  term  of  20 7. Conclusion William Cornick, stand up.  For the murder of Ann Maguire, I sentence you to detention during Her Majesty’s pleasure.  The minimum term I impose is  one  of  20  years.    That  means  you  will  not  even  be  considered  for  release  until  the  year  2034.  As  I  have  said, whether or not you are in fact released then will be a matter for  others.  The  time  that  you  have  spent  on  remand  will 18 either. years.      count  towards  the  minimum  term.  The  Victim  surcharge applies.  You must now go with the dock officer.  19 